[[!meta title="Mono 3.0 preview packages for Debian and Ubuntu"]]
[[!tag mono debian ubuntu packages]]

Just after the [Mono 3.0 release] was announced I started working on Debian
packages and after a couple of days of hard work I already have some preview
packages for you.

The preview packages are currently limited to the AMD64 architecture but can be
installed on Debian/Testing (Wheezy), Debian/Unstable (Sid) and
Ubuntu/Quantal (12.10).
After these preview packages have received some successful feedback (please
leave feedback via comments!), I will upload them to Debian/Experimental.

In case you are shocked why I have packages in just 8 days after the official
[Mono 3.0 release], there are 3 factors that play a big role:

 # New packaging workflow
  * Downstream patches are management in git branches
  * Release Early, Release Often: I no longer port and test every patch
    very carefully (especially with architecture specific patches), instead I
    port them with my best knowledge and upload them to meebey.debian.net
    and/or Debian/Experimental and use that as test ground. If regressions
    happen, let them happen, and make further uploads to address them.
 # New packaging style
  * Starting with [my Mono 2.10 packages], each library has it's own package,
    which simplifies packaging.
 # Sponsored packaging
  * As my [employer] needs Mono packages for an upcoming software project, I was
    granted to work on Mono packages in worktime.

OBLIGATORY WARNING: DO NOT USE THESE PREVIEW PACKAGES ON PRODUCTION SYSTEMS NOR
BLAME ME IF YOUR MONO SOFTWARE NO LONGER WORKS!

## Install instructions ##

Add this line to your /etc/apt/sources.list file:

    deb http://debian.meebey.net/experimental/mono /

Now update the APT database and install mono-complete from that repository:

    apt-get update
    apt-get install mono-complete

  [Mono 3.0 release]: http://www.mono-project.com/Release_Notes_Mono_3.0
  [my Mono 2.0 packages]: /posts/the_big_split_mono_2.10_debian_packaging
  [employer]: http://www.gsd-software.net/
