[[!meta title="Hello World, how small can you get?"]]
[[!meta date="2007-07-09 00:30:00 +0200"]]
[[!tag debian mono java python]]

Today I was checking how much diskspace is need when a small CLI
(.NET) application like gfax is installed. The last 2 years I am
optimizing the Mono packages in Debian to reduce dependency chains.
Dependency chains can cause a small application to become very big
(at least it looks that way) when they are installed, as modern
Linux distributions automaticly install all required dependencies.

So first I worked against GUI dependencies for non-GUI
applications, those are annoying for servers, you don't want to
install a X server or other GUI libraries when you only serve
webpages using ASP.NET.  
Splitting CLI 1.0/1.1 vs 2.0 also seemed to be a very good
candidate to split apart, as applications usually are target at
1.0/1.1 or 2.0.  
Then I split Base-Class-Libraries that have dependencies on native
libraries (via P/Invoke), as those packages must depend on those
native libraries, like DB drivers.  
Last but not least I split debug symbols in a different package, as
those are not needed for normal production usage, and embedded
systems don't have much diskspace. The mono-dbg package is 28.2MB
in size when installed, that's alot.  
The Mono source package in Debian is now building 67 binary
packages, but thanks to APT nobody has to care for that, every part
is installed when needed.

So today I was checking the results of it, how much will a small
application download and install?  
I am testing with a clean minimal Debian system, that way all
dependency chains will show up very easily.  
Installing GFax + required libraries today takes 43MB to download
and 138MB on the harddisk. GFax is a small GNOME application, it
uses libraries like: Mono, GTK\#, GNOME\#, Evolution\#, GConf\#.  
So someone might say: "of course, it is based on that bloaty Mono
virtual machine!", well let's check a different application.  
What about a GTK\# only application (no GNOME) like graphmonkey +
required libraries? That will download 19.5MB and uses 56.4MB on
the harddisk. That's alot less, isn't it? graphmonkey only uses
Mono and GTK\#.  
So it's not Mono taking all no diskspace? Well after all my
packaging optimizations, it's not Mono :)
So how big is a install of a minimal Mono runtime + all required
libraries then?  
Minimal as in enough to run famous the "Hello World".  
It's 2.4MB to download and 7MB on the harddisk, yes you read it
correctly, the super monster bloaty virtual machine just needs 7MB.
Mono only has glib as dependency which will be replaced by the
eglib library some day.

After I had this great result, I wondered how big other runtimes in
Debian are.... like.... Java and Python? The results are interesting...
~~A minimal Python install takes 3.9MB to download and 13.4MB on the harddisk.
Yes, that's almost double the size of Mono, I was surprised too.~~
**Update**: I got comments that Debian has a python2.5-minimal
package available, which is true. So here the numbers of the
smallest Python install you can get on Debian: 1.1MB to download,
3.2MB on the harddisk. So Mono is not smaller than Python
:-D I also noticed that I could reduce the minimal
install size of Mono by 2.7MB if I put the I18N libraries into a
different package. That would make 4.3MB for a minimal Mono install
then.

So and Java? Here it becomes a bit unfair as SUN's license is not
allowing to ship parts of a Java runtime. So the Java package in a
distribution *must* be one package. 34.5MB to download and 95.2MB
on the harddisk. Yes, that's alot, but thats the smallest install
you can get when you want to run anything on it.  
**Update**: Please be aware that the package size + dependency
sizes are considered, not just the naked software size.

So, if you want to run Hello World on a virtual machine: use
~~Mono~~ Python! :-P just kidding...  
Small runtimes are important when it comes to acceptance and
adaption of new technologies, as nobody wants to kill all his
computer resources for it. And I often hear the replies on Linux
IRC channels, when people ask which software they can use to do
$task: "No I don't want o install 100MB just for $task" and they
decide to try some other software with less dependencies and less
resource usage.  
Also for the embedded area, resources are very limited, every MB
still counts there.

For the completeness of my report, here the naked numbers of other
available Java runtimes packages in Debian: sablevm 22.0MB
(63.2MB), kaffe 52.2MB (118MB), jamvm 28.3MB (65.4MB), cocoa 28.8MB
(66.0MB).
